---
layout: distill
title: License plate recognition
description: 
img: assets/img/pia1.jpg
importance: 1
category: work
related_publications: true
---

# Introduction
I realised this project for my computer vision master's internship at the LISIC laboratory of the USTHB. The dataset was provided by a private company. This project aimed at developping a license plate recognition system at the entry of a parking lot. The recognition is done in two steps : the localization of the license plate followed by the the Segmentation and classification of characters.

---
# Localisation with YOLOv5
For plate localization, we used YOLOv5, a state-of-the-art deep learning model. It is composed of three parts : a backbone were it realises a series of convolutions, a neck that has residual connections and also where it realised multi scale "analysis" and a detection part regressing the output vectors (bounding boxes with their positions and "probabilities" for each class). We can see the detailed structure of YOLOv5 in the figure below.
<div class="row">
    <div class="col-sm-12 mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.liquid path="assets/img/YOLOv5s/YOLOv5s.jpg" title="YOLOv5" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" %}
    </div>
</div>
<div class="caption">
    A detailed diagram of YOLOv5's architecture realised with app.diagrams.net.
</div>

<div class="row">
    <div class="col-sm-12 mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.liquid path="assets/img/YOLOv5s/c3.jpg" title="YOLOv5" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" %}
    </div>
</div>
<div class="caption">
    YOLOv5's C3 block.
</div>

<div class="row">
    <div class="col-sm-12 mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.liquid path="assets/img/YOLOv5s/Bottleneck CSP.jpg" title="YOLOv5" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" %}
    </div>
</div>
<div class="caption">
    YOLOv5's Bottleneck CSP block.
</div>

<div class="row">
    <div class="col-sm-12 mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.liquid path="assets/img/YOLOv5s/bottleneck.jpg" title="YOLOv5" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" %}
    </div>
</div>
<div class="caption">
    YOLOv5's Bottleneck block.
</div>

Whith the YOLOv5 architecture, we achieved a recognition rate of 93.69% for plate localization.

---
# Character recognition

For character segmentation and classification (recognition), we compared two approaches:

* The first approach uses YOLOv5 only. It allowed a recognition rate of 98.25%.
* The second approach uses YOLOv5 for character localization followed by a classification step where we extract characteristic vectors with a Convolutional Autoencoder of our design, then classify them with a OC-PCA (One-Class Principal Component Analysis) classifier. OC-PCA is a supervised learning method that reduces an $n$-class classification problem into $n$ binary classification problems, where the classification of an instance is done by projecting it onto the $n$ vector subspaces generated by the principal components learned during the $n$ PCAs and then calculating the error (information loss) of each projection measured by the correlation coefficient and assigning the instance to the class with the minimum error. This method achieved an average recognition rate (across classes) of 98.43%.

<div class="row">
    <div class="col-sm-6 mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.liquid path="assets/img/ocpca1.jpg" title="example image" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" %}
    </div>
    <div class="col-sm-6 mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.liquid path="assets/img/ocpca2.jpg" title="example image" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" %}
    </div>
</div>
<div class="caption">
    
</div>

The figures above represent license plate digits at the top, given as input, and at the bottom, received as output from the convolutional autoencoder. The maximum recognition rate achieved was 98.43% for 18 Principal Components.

